Good day ,I'm Norman Wildberger this is one of
a series of foundational videos on mathematics
where we are attempting to lay out new and
more careful foundations for the subject but
together with building up the subject we also
need to critique current practice when it needs
critiquing and when it comes to angles mathematics
is sorely in need of some severe critiquing the
usual concept runs something like this we have to
raise say r1 and r2 and then angle is supposedly a
quantity which measures the separation between
these two rays it's presented to young people
as a very elementary simple easy to work with
concept when the reality is that it's far from
being any of those it's a difficult concept it's
actually hard to work with and it leads to a lot
of logical weakness and insecurity in geometry and
trigonometry the difficulty you can see by opening
some geometry and trigonometry books and see how
many of them actually have a careful and precise
definition of the concept of an angle almost
none of them do we're gonna talk about some
basic issues we're going to talk about problems
with the definitions some historical remarks
we're talk about units and your rationality that's
involved in the concept the ambiguities and the
imprecisions that angles bring too many practical
problems and how the concept forces young people
to rely on transcendental functions which are
in fact quite irrelevant for doing geometry and
trigonometry so let's have a look to start with
at what exactly is an angle students in primary
school are introduced to an angle in the same way
that the Babylonians four thousand years ago used
the concept we take a circle and we divide it
into 360 equal pieces and we call each one of
those pieces a degree so here's my hand written
attempt of doing that so there's a ninety that's
one quarter of the way along that I've divided
ninety as best as I could into three pieces call
them 60 and thirty now that I've sort of my hands
subdivide each of those into three pieces so that
each one of these little arcs is ten degrees and I
haven't bothered further trying to subdivide them
doing this approximately it's not hard but doing
it accurately poses grave difficulties in fact
in some sense it's really impossible this goes
back to the ancient Greeks who struggled with
the idea of how to trisect an angle so if we have
just that circular piece from thirty to sixty and
we want to divide it up into three equal arcs it's
very difficult to do this and in fact two thousand
years after the Greeks struggled with it it was
finally proven that you couldn't do this with
ruler and compass the situation is dramatically
different for landslide segments where this
construction that we've seen before you create
three equal segments there and then you draw
parallel lines and that splits any line segment
into three equal pieces there's no parallel result
for arcs of circles so that when we say divide
the circle into 360 equal pieces it's easy to say
but it's actually hard to do a three-dimensional
implementation of this is quite difficult if you
actually have a concrete situation you want to
measure some angles between beams it's not clear
how you can get your protractor up there the
additive 'ti that seems to be built into the
situation is largely illusory if you have two
angles which are bigger say like that one 254
degrees we add that angle to itself then we're
not going to get 508 but we're going to rather
have to subtract 360 to get the angle in the right
range but the most natural problem is that it's
really a physical answer relying on a piece of an
instrument a protractor it's not really a precise
mathematical definite there's a variant to this
scheme that's a little bit more constructive that
uses by sections only so the idea is to divide
the circle not into 360 pieces but into first
two pieces and then into four pieces and then to
continuously divide each arc into two equal arcs
that can be done relatively easily because for
example to divide that arc into two just requires
taking that cord and finding its midpoint so that
will automatically split that arc into two equal
ones so then we can further subdivide this arc
into two equal pieces and then this one two equal
pieces and so on that gives us a way of pinning
down a lot of angles precisely but unfortunately
most of the angles that actually occur in practice
are not obtainable in a finite number of steps
with this kind of bisection so what it requires is
a binary approach or an approximation approach to
creating angles by an infinite sequence of such by
sections for this reason this approach is not too
often used there also some number theoretical
difficulties with it that we won't talk about
so here now is the modern definition that students
learned in high school after they've already spent
a few years becoming familiar with the Babylonian
360 degree definition they learn a new way of
thinking about an angle here are two rays we
construct a circle of some radius R centered
at the intersection point and then we define the
angle as a ratio of two lengths length of the arc
of the circle divided by this length radius of
the circle L divided by R is now our definition
of theta now that's going to be a different kind
of angle than the Babylonian angle because for
example in the situation like this this length
here is maybe you know a little bit more than
the radius maybe one point two times the radius
a that'll mean that this angle here will actually
have the Valu 1.2 roughly because the ratio this
length to this length is roughly 1.2 so in the
Babylonian system would be maybe 70 degrees quite
different from 1.2 alright what's the problem
with this definition it this definition is a big
cheat ok in two very important ways first of all
it really needs a prior theory of arc length you
need to understand what the definition of this arc
length is and have some means some effective means
of computing it this is a point that Archimedes
well understood he spent a lot of time and thought
trying to compute the arc length of a portion of
a circle in his attempt to find PI accurately and
what he did is used a succession of interior and
exterior polygons and he approximated this length
better and better by increasing a number of sides
to these approximating polygons it was quite a
tour de force and Archimedes really anticipated
calculus when he was doing this kind of limiting
procedure calculus is really necessary for any
kind of coherent theory of arc length the other
serious difficulty with this definition is that
it requires a prior theory of Euclidean geometry
first because there's a theorem behind here which
is that if you say double the radius of this
circle then the length of this circular arc
will also double that's not entirely obvious in
fact it's not true on the surface of a sphere
or on some other curved surface that theorem
requires a proof and to prove that you first
need a theory of Euclidean geometry or you need
to have developed some calculus either way this
definition as it stands rests on assumptions
and work that has not been done by the high
school students who meet it and even at the
university level the subsequent basis has not been
established when people are using this definition
no angle so it's a cheat and this cheat has many
ramifications throughout modern mathematics next
time we're going to talk more about the problems
with angles I hope you'll join me for that
.I'm Norman Wildberger ,thanks for listening.